PR: Update and improve the content of the Files pane docs (#146)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/fileexplorer.rst

#####
Files 
#####

The **Files** pane is a filesystem and directory browser built right into Spyder.
You can view and filter files according to their type and extension, open them with the :doc:`editor` or an external tool, and perform many common operations.

> .. image:: images/files/files-standard.png

Author: Redoing this at 690 px

> .. image:: images/files/files-standard.png

Reviewer: Looks good now

   :alt: Spyder Files pane, showing a tree view of files and metadata

===============
File operations
===============

To browse the files on your system, you can use the arrows at the top of the pane.
You can expand/collapse the folders in the pane to display the files and subdirectories hierarchically. 
Double-clicking a folder will open it, showing the files inside and making it your working directory.

> .. image:: images/files/files-browse.gif

Reviewer 2: This gif is fine for me, so it's up to you @juanis2112 if you want to follow @CAM-Gerlach's suggestion.

> .. image:: images/files/files-browse.gif

Author: Leaving it as it is

   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing browsing directories

To open a file in the :guilabel:`Editor` from the :guilabel:`Files` pane, double-click its name.
If you right-click over it, you will see a context menu that allows you to access a number of functions, including running scripts; creating, renaming, moving, deleting files; and opening them in your computer's file manager.

> .. image:: images/files/files-context-menu.png

Reviewer: I would suggest cropping the screenshot you already have much more tightly on the context menu here so it is easier to read and focus on and takes up less unnecessary space, since the purpose of the screenshot is to show the  context menu, not the rest of the full Spyder UI.

Example of roughly what I'm thinking:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/99687567-6d9ec400-2a4a-11eb-8cb4-fecf23778582.png)

Reviewer 2: I agree with @CAM-Gerlach.

Author: Redoing this but showing the menu inside the files pane

   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing context menu

You can copy and paste one or several files to and from the pane, and copy their absolute or relative paths to the clipboard as text.
If copying the paths for multiple files, they will be automatically formatted so you can paste them directly into a Python list.

.. image:: images/files/files-copy-path.gif
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing copying absolute path to Editor

Additionally, the :guilabel:`Files` pane allows you to perform basic operations with ``git``, like commiting your changes and browsing the repository a given file or folder is part of.

> .. image:: images/files/files-commit.gif

Reviewer: There appears to be about a second of black slug at the end of the GIF. Instead, it should use that time to pause on the completed commit to show the result of the action. Otherwise, looks good.

Reviewer 2: Agree with @CAM-Gerlach too.

Author: Agreed

Reviewer: Still doesn't pause at the end for more than a few hundred milliseconds, should pause for a second so the user can see the final result

   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing commiting change of file

============
Options menu
============

> The options menu in the top right of the :guilabel:`Find` pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The options menu in the top right of the :guilabel:`Files` pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.
```

Fix incorrect pane name.

> By default, the option :guilabel:`Show all files` is activated, which displays the contents of your working directory without filtering. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, :guilabel:`Files` displays the contents of your working directory without filtering.
```

`Show all files` was removed in 4.2

> By default, the option :guilabel:`Show all files` is activated, which displays the contents of your working directory without filtering. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the pane displays the contents of your working directory without filtering. 
```

As @ccordoba12 suggestion, except perhaps a little clearer phrasing

> However, if you deactivate this, the pane will only show files matching the patterns set under :guilabel:`Show filenames with these extensions...`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the pane can show only files matching the patterns set under :guilabel:`Show filenames with these extensions...`.
```

Fix phrasing according to my suggestion above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it can filter the list to show only files matching the patterns set under :guilabel:`Show filenames with these extensions...`, if you toggle the :guilabel:`Activate filename filters` button in the pane toolbar.
```

Clearer phrasing and actually mention how to enable this, I don't see it anywhere else.

Also, there's a serious bug with the tooltip of the filter toggle in 4.2—its called "Activate filename filters", but the option (as makes much more sense) _enables_ the filters. Therefore, the tooltip needs to be changed to read `Activate filename filters`.

> .. image:: images/files/files-filters.gif

Reviewer: I found it very hard to follow what happens here, because everything happened so quickly and the file structure was sufficiently complex that it was almost impossible to easily tell the effect of the actions taken. Initially enabling file filters happens almost instantly from the start of the GIF that its almost impossible to clearly see the before and after state, and thus the effect of the filters. Deleting the `.txt` extension and hitting `OK` had no immediate effect, as the two `txt` files were still there (though even this wasn't obvious, since they were hidden behind the dialog). File filters are then disabled and re-enabled to actually hide the files but again this all flashes by so quickly and there's so many other folders its hard to see what's going on without watching it several times. Finally, there appears to be a short black frame at the end

To fix this, I suggest:

* [ ] Use as the current directory a folder with perhaps a dozen files or so files different types, around half included in the default filter and half not, and perhaps half again of the former with the `.txt` extension, plus a couple subfolders. This will more clearly show the effect of the filters on a reasonable number of files.
* [ ] Slow down the actions some, and pause where needed: a second or two at the beginning before enabling filters, a second after closing the dialog, and another second at the end.
* [ ] If the issue of filters not getting applied immediately is not fixed, here in the text that the option needs to be toggled for changes to take effect.
* [ ] Remove black frame at the end

@ccordoba12 shouldn't the new filters be applied immediately when the user clicks OK? Its unintuitive for the user's changes to have no effect until manually disabling and re-enabling filters; if a fix can't be released promptly, i.e. connect the OK QButton to a Qt signal that refreshes the filter), we need to at least mention this in the docs.

Reviewer 2: I agree with this suggestion too.

> @ccordoba12 shouldn't the new filters be applied immediately when the user clicks OK?

The filters are applied only when the filter button is clicked.

> we need to at least mention this in the docs.

Ok, sound good to me.

Reviewer: > The filters are applied only when the filter button is clicked.

Yeah, what I explain above is that if filters are enabled (that button is toggled), changing the extensions in the dialog doesn't update the filter accordingly; the button has to be manually toggled on and off again to update them, which is quite unintuitive and may cause the user some frustration unless and until they figure out why there changes aren't being reflected in the filtered output. Therefore, the OK button should send a signal that's connected to whatever slot that triggers an update of the filters.

Author: Will redo with fewer files/folders and pane in the center to show only the pane area. Please ping me @ccordoba12 when the toggle and tooltip issues are fixed.

Reviewer: Opened as spyder-ide/spyder#14328

Reviewer: This is a lot better, thanks.

   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing filtering files

You can also activate the :guilabel:`Show hidden files` option, which will display files that are invisible by default in your operating system.

> You can change which file attributes you want to see by hiding or displaying the :guilabel:`Type`, :guilabel:`Size` and :guilabel:`Date Modified` columns using the corresponding menu options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can change which file attributes you want to see by hiding or displaying the :guilabel:`Type`, :guilabel:`Size` and :guilabel:`Date Modified` columns using the corresponding menu options.
```

The previous paragraph also starts with `You can`.

.. image:: images/files/files-columns-display.png
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing columns checked and shown

> The menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single- instead of a double-click, to suit your preferences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single instead of a double-click, to suit your preferences.
```

The hyphen after single seemed like an error to me.

Reviewer: That's standard syntax for this situation, when there are two alternatives for the first part of a hyphenated compound word.

=================
File associations
=================

> You can associate different external applications with specific file extensions they can open.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Files` allows you to associate different external applications with specific file extensions they can open.
```

Just to change the repetitive `you can`, found at the beginning of many paragraphs.

Under the :guilabel:`File associations` tab of the :guilabel:`Files` preferences pane, you can add file types and set the external program used to open each of them by default. 

> .. image:: images/files/files-associations.gif

Reviewer: Pause for one more second at the end, so the user can see the final result and the transition is clearer; otherwise looks good.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Author: Agreed

Reviewer: Looks good now

   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing files associations

Once you've set this up, files will automatically launch in the associated application when opened from Spyder's :guilabel:`Files` pane.
Additionally, when you right-click a file, you will find an :guilabel:`Open with...` option that will allow you to select from the applications associated with this extension.

> .. image:: images/files/files-associations-open.gif

Reviewer: There appeared to be several seconds of black slug at the end of this GIF. Otherwise, it looked good.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Author: Agreed

Reviewer: Looks good now

#####
Files 
#####

> The **Files** pane is a built-in filesystem and directory browser that allows you to view and filter files according to their type and extension. You can also open files with the :doc:`editor` or an external tool, and perform some operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Files** pane is a built-in filesystem and directory browser that allows you to view and filter files according to their type and extension.
You can also open files with the :doc:`editor` or an external tool, and perform some operations.
```

.. image:: images/file_explorer/file_explorer_standard.png
   :alt: Spyder File Explorer panel, showing a tree view of files and metadata

|

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

===============
File Operations
===============

> To browse between the files in your system, you can use the arrows in the top of the pane. You can expand/contract the folders displayed in the pane to deploy the files and subfolders hierarchically. Double cliking a folder will open it showing the files on it and changing your working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To browse between the files in your system, you can use the arrows in the top of the pane.
You can expand/contract the folders displayed in the pane to deploy the files and subfolders hierarchically. 
Double cliking a folder will open it showing the files on it and changing your working directory.
```

[GIF showing browsing files and showing changing the working directory]

> To open a file in the editor from the file pane, double click over its name. If you right click over it, you will see a context menu that allows you to access a number of functions including running scripts, creating, renaming, moving, deleting and showing files in your computer's file manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To open a file in the editor from the file pane, double click over its name.
If you right click over it, you will see a context menu that allows you to access a number of functions including running scripts, creating, renaming, moving, deleting and showing files in your computer's file manager.
```

[Screenshot showing context menu]

You can also copy and paste one or several files in the folder where you are located in the pane, or copy their absolute and relative's path in the clipboard to paste it as text.

[GIF showing copy path and pasting it in console]

Additionally, the Files pane allows you to perform basic operations with ``git`` like commiting the changes of a file and browsing the repository from which the file is part of.

[GIF showing commiting change of file and then showing repo]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

============
Options Menu
============

The options menu in the top right of the Find pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.

> By default, the option Show all files is activated, which displays all your files in your working directory without filtering. However, if you deactivate this option, you can filter the files that the pane displays according to their extensions by clicking the corresponding option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the option Show all files is activated, which displays all your files in your working directory without filtering. 
However, if you deactivate this option, you can filter the files that the pane displays according to their extensions by clicking the corresponding option.
```

[GIF showing deactivating show all files and changing some extensions to hide some files]

You can also activate the Show hidden files option which will show files that are not by default displayed in your file manager.

You can change what kind of information you want to see of files in the pane by hiding or displaying "kind", "size" and "date modified" columns. For this, check these columns in the options menu.

[Screenshot showing files pane with kind, size and date modified columns and the options menu with these activated]

> The options menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single-click instead of a double-click, to suit different user preferences. With the option Single click to open files checked, only a single click is needed to open a file either externally or in Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The options menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single-click instead of a double-click, to suit different user preferences.
With the option Single click to open files checked, only a single click is needed to open a file either externally or in Spyder.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

=================
File associations
=================

> You can associate different external applications with specific file extensions they can open. Under the File associations tab of the Files preferences pane, you can add file types and set the external program used to open each of them by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can associate different external applications with specific file extensions they can open.
Under the File associations tab of the Files preferences pane, you can add file types and set the external program used to open each of them by default. 
```

[GIF opening file associations preference and setting LibreOffice for csv files]

> Once you've set this up, files will automatically launch in the associated application when opened from the Files pane in Spyder. Additionally, when you right-click a file you will find an Open with... option that will show the application associated with this extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've set this up, files will automatically launch in the associated application when opened from the Files pane in Spyder.
Additionally, when you right-click a file you will find an Open with... option that will show the application associated with this extension.
```

[GIF showing Open with...` option over a csv file and opening it with LibreOffice]

> Related components

Reviewer 2: Please make this a section of the same level as the rest, so it doesn't end up being a subsection of `File associations`

Author: Done!

Reviewer 2: You did in the page for Find but not here.

#####
Files 
#####

The **Files** pane is a built-in filesystem and directory browser that allows you to view and filter files according to their type and extension.
You can also open files with the :doc:`editor` or an external tool, and perform some operations.

.. image:: images/file_explorer/file_explorer_standard.png
   :alt: Spyder File Explorer panel, showing a tree view of files and metadata

|

===============
File Operations
===============

> To browse between the files in your system, you can use the arrows in the top of the pane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To browse the files on your system, you can use the arrows at the top of the pane.
```

Fix grammar and wording issues

> You can expand/contract the folders displayed in the pane to deploy the files and subfolders hierarchically. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can expand/collapse the folders displayed in the pane to display the files and subdirectories hierarchically. 
```

Fix wording errors and avoid repetition

> Double cliking a folder will open it showing the files on it and changing your working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Double-clicking a folder will open it, showing the files inside and making it your working directory.
```

Fix spelling, punctuation, wording/grammar and explain working dir change more explicitly.

[GIF showing browsing files and showing changing the working directory]

> To open a file in the editor from the file pane, double click over its name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To open a file in the :guilabel:`Editor` from the :guilabel:`Files` pane, double-click its name.
```

Fix wording, use correct pane names/caps, and use appropriate reST directives

> If you right click over it, you will see a context menu that allows you to access a number of functions including running scripts, creating, renaming, moving, deleting and showing files in your computer's file manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you right-click over it, you will see a context menu that allows you to access a number of functions, including running scripts; creating, renaming, moving, deleting files; and opening them in your computer's file manager.
```

Fix grammar and punctuation, and improve phrasing

[Screenshot showing context menu]

> You can also copy and paste one or several files in the folder where you are located in the pane, or copy their absolute and relative's path in the clipboard to paste it as text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can copy and paste one or several files to and from the pane, and copy their absolute or relative paths to the clipboard as text.
If copying the paths for multiple files, they will be automatically formatted so you can paste them directly into a Python list.
```

Fix grammar and wording errors and simplify/clarify description, I found it rather hard to understand (though I'm still not entirely happy with the rewording...suggestions more than welcome). I also added a description of a particularly useful part of this feature that users might not be initially aware of.

> [GIF showing copy path and pasting it in console]

Reviewer: In order to actually show what this feature is capable of and is more likely to be used for, and is less obvious to the user without seeing it, I would recommend copying the paths for multiple selected files and pasting them in a list in the Editor.

Author: will do

> Additionally, the Files pane allows you to perform basic operations with ``git`` like commiting the changes of a file and browsing the repository from which the file is part of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the :guilabel:`Files` pane allows you to perform basic operations with ``git``, like commiting your changes and browsing the repository a given file or folder is part of.
```

Fix grammar and more accurately describe the Commit action

> [GIF showing commiting change of file and then showing repo]

Reviewer: This might be rather long, but let's see what you come up with and we can always speed it up or cut parts out.

============

> Options Menu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Options menu
```

Sentance case

============

> The options menu in the top right of the Find pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The options menu in the top right of the :guilabel:`Find` pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.
```

reST

> By default, the option Show all files is activated, which displays all your files in your working directory without filtering. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the option :guilabel:`Show all files` is activated, which displays the contents of your working directory without filtering. 
```

Avoid repetition and awkward phrasing

> However, if you deactivate this option, you can filter the files that the pane displays according to their extensions by clicking the corresponding option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you deactivate this, the pane will only show files matching the customizable patterns listed under :guilabel:`Edit filename filters...`.
```

Describe this much more clearly and explicitly; I was really confused by this sentence myself.

Author: Not sure if customizable patterns makes it clearer. Also this content is based on 4.x where the menu is different so this option you are describing doesn't exist.

Reviewer: Thanks for the heads up; I didn't know there would be substantial UI changes and feature additions beyond just visual tweaks and solving bugs. I updated the above suggestion accordingly to reflect the change.

I see; I played around with it a bit but wasn't sure of a clearer and more understandable way to describe it that was accurate and not misleading. What might you suggest? The issue with the previous descriptor, "according to their extensions" is that they can actually match anywhere in the filename (in fact, several of the default patterns don't involve an extension at all), as well as duplicative of the guilabel text. @ccordoba12 your ideas here would be helpful as well.

As a sidenote, after testing it I have a few minor followup fixes I can help implement, for which I'll open an issue for and tag you two on.

[GIF showing deactivating show all files and changing some extensions to hide some files]

> You can also activate the Show hidden files option which will show files that are not by default displayed in your file manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Linux and macOS, you can also activate the :guilabel:`Show hidden files` option, which will display files beginning with a dot (`.`) that are hidden by default.
```

Describe this more clearly, concisely and explicitly and improve phrasing.

I don't believe that option exists on Windows; it does not appear for me in 4.1.4 and dotfiles are not hidden by default either in Spyder or on Windows in general. @ccordoba12 can you confirm?

Author: This option was recently implemented in 4.x.

Reviewer: Ah, I see it now. Updated the suggestion accordingly, thanks.

> You can change what kind of information you want to see of files in the pane by hiding or displaying "kind", "size" and "date modified" columns. For this, check these columns in the options menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change which file attributes you want to see by hiding or displaying the :guilabel:`Type`, :guilabel:`Size` and :guilabel:`Date Modified` columns using the corresponding menu options..
```

Combine the sentences to reduce repetition and redundancy, avoid confusing repetition of "kind", use appropriate reST syntax, improve phrasing/grammar, use correct names and capitalization of columns

[Screenshot showing files pane with kind, size and date modified columns and the options menu with these activated]

> The options menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single-click instead of a double-click, to suit different user preferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The menu also gives you the option to open files and directories with a single- instead of a double-click, to suit your preferences.
```

Avoid repetition, rephrase more directly and actively using "your"

> With the option Single click to open files checked, only a single click is needed to open a file either externally or in Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is just restating what is already said above, and adds nothing new (except for the "externally or in Spyder" phrase, which is likely to just be confusing without the benefit of the below section, but if desired can be inserted between "directories" and "with" above).

=================
File associations
=================

You can associate different external applications with specific file extensions they can open.

> Under the File associations tab of the Files preferences pane, you can add file types and set the external program used to open each of them by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the :guilabel:`File associations` tab of the :guilabel:`Files` preferences pane, you can add file types and set the external program used to open each of them by default. 
```

reST

[GIF opening file associations preference and setting LibreOffice for csv files]

> Once you've set this up, files will automatically launch in the associated application when opened from the Files pane in Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've set this up, files will automatically launch in the associated application when opened from Spyder's :guilabel:`Files` pane.
```

Add reST syntax and cleaner phrasing

> Additionally, when you right-click a file you will find an Open with... option that will show the application associated with this extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, when you right-click a file, you will find an :guilabel:`Open with...` option that will allow you to select from the applications associated with this extension.
```

More accurately describe this option, and add reST syntax and punctuation.

> [GIF showing Open with...` option over a csv file and opening it with LibreOffice]

Reviewer: I would have multiple applications associated with the filetype, as that is the point of this menu to be able to select from more than just the default.

Files
#####

The **Files** pane is a filesystem and directory browser built right into Spyder.
You can view and filter files according to their type and extension, open them with the :doc:`editor` or an external tool, and perform many common operations.

.. image:: images/files/files-standard.png
   :alt: Spyder Files pane, showing a tree view of files and metadata

===============
File operations
===============

To browse the files on your system, use the arrows at the top of the pane.
You can expand/collapse the folders in the pane to display the files and subdirectories hierarchically. 
Double-clicking a folder will open it, showing the files inside and making it your working directory.

.. image:: images/files/files-browse.gif
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing browsing directories

> To open a file in the :guilabel:`Editor` from the :guilabel:`Files` pane, double-click its name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To open a file in the :guilabel:`Editor` from the :guilabel:`Files` pane, double-click its name.
```

Somehow both newlines got deleted here (as sometimes happens with Github suggestions, unfortunately), which is a syntax error in reST and is failing the build

Reviewer: Still needs this one.

.. image:: images/files/files-context-menu.png
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing context menu

You can copy and paste one or several files to and from the pane, and copy their absolute or relative paths to the clipboard as text.
If copying the paths for multiple files, they will be automatically formatted so you can paste them directly into a Python list.

.. image:: images/files/files-copy-path.gif
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing copying absolute path to Editor

Additionally, the :guilabel:`Files` pane allows you to perform basic operations with Git, like commiting your changes and browsing the repository a given file or folder is part of.

.. image:: images/files/files-commit.gif
   :alt: Spyder Files pane showing commiting change of file

============
Options menu
============

The options menu in the top right of the :guilabel:`Files` pane offers several ways to customize how your files are displayed.

By default, the pane displays the contents of your working directory without filtering.

> However, it can filter the list to show only files matching the patterns set under :guilabel:`Show filenames with these extensions...`, if you toggle the :guilabel:`Activate filename filters` button in the pane toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it can filter the list to show only files matching the patterns set under :guilabel:`Show filenames with these extensions...`, if you toggle the :guilabel:`Filter filenames` button in the pane toolbar.
```

This was changed per the below
